docs: introduce freezing and archiving process for inactive API proposals (#190)
camaraproject/Governance: documentation/API-Onboarding-and-Lifecycle.md

> **Note:** The transition to **Archived Proposal** described below refers specifically to the lifecycle of an API **proposal**, not an **API Repository**. Archived proposals are proposals that never progressed to onboarding or development. In contrast, Archived Repositories are deprecated or obsolete API repositories, as described in the *Archived Stage* section of the lifecycle.

### Proposal Status Lifecycle Summary

| **Status**   | **Description**                                                                 | **Transition Criteria**                                                                                     | **Next Step**                    |
|--------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| **Active**   | Proposal is under active discussion, development or onboarding.                 | - API owner attends WG meetings<br>- Recent GitHub activity (comments, PRs, updates)<br>- Onboarding tracker in progress | → Remains Active or → Frozen     |

> | **Frozen**   | Proposal is temporarily inactive but may be reactivated by contributors.        | - No activity in GitHub for **6+ weeks**<br>- API owner absent **3 WG meetings**<br>- Approved by TSC but **no onboarding tracker** after 3 WG sessions | → Reactivated (returns to Active) or → Archived |

Reviewer: I have a question about the criteria "Approved by TSC but **no onboarding tracker** after 3 WG sessions":

My understanding is that the Onboarding Tracker issue will be created always after the TSC has approved an API Repository proposal. the Onboarding Tracker sometimes get stuck as the original API proposal owner does not nominate the initial code owner - and therefore no repository will be created. Is that the case you meant?

After a repository is created we need another description about triggers which will start a review for archiving an inactive/stale API Repository.

Progress on these tasks is documented in tracking issues maintained by the API Backlog Working Group.

> If an API proposal is approved by the TSC but no onboarding tracker is initiated within two API Backlog WG sessions due to inactivity or missing response from the proposal owner, the proposal may be marked as *Frozen*. See the [Frozen API Proposals](#frozen-api-proposals) section for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
If an API proposal is approved by the TSC but no onboarding tracker is initiated within three API Backlog WG sessions due to inactivity or missing response from the proposal owner, the proposal may be marked as *Frozen*. See the [Frozen API Proposals](#frozen-api-proposals) section for more information.
```

> **Note:** The transition to **Archived Proposal** described below refers specifically to the lifecycle of an API **proposal**, not an **API Repository**. Archived proposals are proposals that never progressed to onboarding or development. In contrast, Archived Repositories are deprecated or obsolete API repositories, as described in the *Archived Stage* section of the lifecycle.

### Proposal Status Lifecycle Summary

| **Status**   | **Description**                                                                 | **Transition Criteria**                                                                                     | **Next Step**                    |
|--------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| **Active**   | Proposal is under active discussion, development or onboarding.                 | - API owner attends WG meetings<br>- Recent GitHub activity (comments, PRs, updates)<br>- Onboarding tracker in progress | → Remains Active or → Frozen     |

> | **Frozen**   | Proposal is temporarily inactive but may be reactivated by contributors.        | - No activity in GitHub for **6+ weeks**<br>- API owner absent **2 WG meetings**<br>- Approved by TSC but **no onboarding tracker** after 2 WG sessions | → Reactivated (returns to Active) or → Archived |

Author: ```suggestion
| **Frozen**   | Proposal is temporarily inactive but may be reactivated by contributors.        | - No activity in GitHub for **6+ weeks**<br>- API owner absent **3 WG meetings**<br>- Approved by TSC but **no onboarding tracker** after 2 WG sessions | → Reactivated (returns to Active) or → Archived |
```

> | **Archived** | Proposal has shown no reactivation after an extended frozen period.             | - Frozen for **6+ months**<br>- Inactive for **1 meta-release cycle**<br>- Explicit decision by WG or TSC    | → New proposal required to resume |

Author: ```suggestion
| **Archived** | Proposal has shown no reactivation after an extended frozen period. | - Frozen for **two consecutive meta-release cycles**<br>- Explicit decision by WG or TSC | → New proposal required to resume |
```

- A proposal is **approved by the TSC**, but **no onboarding tracker is created** within three WG sessions due to a lack of follow-up from the owner or external blockers.
- There is **no activity** on the issue (e.g. no comments, PRs, or updates) for **6 weeks or more**.

### Effects of Freezing

- The GitHub issue will be labeled with `frozen`, in addition to existing labels such as `API Proposal`.
- Related open or unmerged Pull Requests (PRs) will be closed with reference to the frozen status.
- The proposal is moved to the “Frozen Proposals” section at the end of WG meeting minutes and excluded from active agenda discussions.

### Reactivating a Frozen Proposal

To reactivate a frozen proposal:

- A contributor must comment on the GitHub issue and explicitly mention the proposal owner.
- The API Backlog WG must be notified at least **one week before** the meeting agenda is finalized.

Upon reactivation, the proposal will return to the main agenda for discussion.

### Archiving Frozen Proposals

A frozen proposal will be archived if:
- It remains frozen and does not show progress across **two consecutive CAMARA meta-release cycles**, or

> - There is an **explicit decision** by the API Backlog WG or the TSC.

Reviewer: After we clarified that this section is only about API proposals I see here two points:

* A frozen proposal is just an inactive issue within the API Backlog. I don't see any need to bind it to CAMARA meta-release cycles, I would rather bind it to a defined time since it was frozen
* I don't see a need to keep it for one year or even longer. Six months is from my perspective complete enough for a frozen proposal

Reviewer: @albertoramosmonagas The suggested proposal for 141 to 143 LGTM, but please remove the AI generated line 145 (and be careful not to be mistaken as an AI agent ;-)).

|--------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| **Active**   | Proposal is under active discussion, development or onboarding.                 | - API owner attends WG meetings<br>- Recent GitHub activity (comments, PRs, updates)<br>- Onboarding tracker in progress | → Remains Active or → Frozen     |
| **Frozen**   | Proposal is temporarily inactive but may be reactivated by contributors.        | - No activity in GitHub for **6+ weeks**<br>- API owner absent **3 WG meetings**<br>- Approved by TSC but **no onboarding tracker** after 3 WG sessions | → Reactivated (returns to Active) or → Archived |
| **Archived** | Proposal has shown no reactivation after an extended frozen period. | - Frozen for **two consecutive meta-release cycles**<br>- Explicit decision by WG or TSC | → New proposal required to resume |

> > **Note:** The condition "Approved by TSC but onboarding tracker not created" applies to proposals that have not yet resulted in a Sandbox repository. Once a repository exists, further lifecycle rules apply as described in the *Lifecycle Management of API Repositories* section.

Reviewer: In line with my comment on line 121, I would suggest (but please adjust as needed):

```suggestion
> **Note:** The condition "Approved by TSC but no progress regarding onboarding" applies to proposals that have not yet resulted in a Sandbox repository. Once a repository exists, further lifecycle rules apply as described in the *Lifecycle Management of API Repositories* section.
```

### What is a Frozen Proposal?

A proposal is considered *frozen* when it no longer shows signs of active engagement or development by its owner. This mechanism prevents inactive items from blocking discussions while preserving them for future reactivation.

### Criteria for Freezing a Proposal

A proposal may be marked as frozen under any of the following conditions:

- The API Owner is absent from **three consecutive API Backlog WG meetings**.

> - A proposal is **approved by the TSC**, but **no onboarding tracker is created** within three WG sessions due to a lack of follow-up from the owner or external blockers.

Reviewer: The "Onboarding tracker" issue will be created by the APIBacklog team

```suggestion
- A proposal is **approved by the TSC**, but **there is no progress regarding onboarding** within three WG sessions due to a lack of follow-up from the owner or external blockers.
```
